...Bless as the Korean War is... Over.
Yeah, Korean veterans... Jim Marsh... Yeah, it's already over by then.
Yeah, yeah.
Jim Marsh, who was in my class, was a Korean vet.
Yes, yes.
So the only people that weren't in the Corps here were the returning Korean vets, and Marsh and several guys in our class were in that group.
Did you...
I was in between wars.
And you didn't do much architecture work.
Didn't do any.
Well, I'm sorry, I worked part-time.
But, I mean, oh, as a civilian?
Mm-hmm.
Okay.
I worked on weekends, had a weekend job.
And then I taught school, which was one of my first teaching experiences, actually.
I taught what is the high school equivalency, GED.
I taught three courses for GED candidates in the Army at night.
that one of my friends said, hey, you're a college graduate, aren't you?
You know, I think you could probably do this.
Come over here.
We got this program at night.
We're teaching these fellas.
So I taught English and algebra and slide rule.
And I stayed one class in front of my class most of the time.
Then you get out, and then what happens?
I got out and began looking for work.
Again, I made a fairly conscious decision that I didn't want to work in a big city, which is not the way most architects would play, that sort of thing.
I don't know whether it was a mistake or not, but I didn't do that.
So I started from Port Arthur, Texas and drifted up along the northeastern part of the state.
And every time we got to a town, or a town of any size, I got the yellow pages out, looked to see who was there, and went and interviewed with them.
And did that up through Longview and Tyler, and then cut across the top of the state, Greenville and Wichita Falls, and then came back through Temple and Bryan College Station probably.
and back to Port Arthur.
Now, if that trip didn't work, I had another one laid out to go further to the west and south and make another loop around the outsides of Houston and San Antonio and Austin, those places like that.
But I hit a job in Wichita Falls where the architect, it was an architect and engineer together in partnership and the architect had just left in a fit and broken the Coke machine open with a two before and took his half the nickels and left and went to Beaumont, Texas.
And what was left there was an engineer that had several major architecture jobs, a couple of banks, a couple of high schools, some major work.
And there was no architect in the office.
I mean, there was not a single architect in the office.
And so he hired me and my traveling companion
He hired me, and then he said, is there any more?
And I said, yeah, but there's a guy waiting out in the car.
He's looking for a job, too.
So he went in.
He hired him.
Then we called two more classmates, and he hired them.
So we had a whole bunch of us in his office.
And sort of the good news, I guess, was that we were immediately immersed in responsible roles.
We were in charge of a job.
And we had almost total and complete reign.
And we managed to swim.
And we knew if we had to have help, we had a structural engineer standing over there that could help us with most of it.
This is 1950?
59.
And you did that how long?
I did it two years.
We were feeling so fat and sassy at that time that we had taken a little trip up to, in between Denver and Colorado Springs up in the mountains, where one of my old army friends
that I did a house for when we were in the Army, I actually didn't do much.
He brought me a picture out of a home, House Beautiful,
And they used to have their house of the year published once a year.
And with it, for $5, you could send off and get plans of these really beautiful, large homes.
And he did that, and he brought it over.
And on my kitchen table, we changed a few things around, moved the bathroom here and there, and redid some floor plan, but otherwise built it.
And so when I was up in Wichita Falls,
I've been there two years.
I thought, I'll run up and see my old friend from Kansas, and I'll just, I'm going to see if that house is up there, and sure enough, it was.
He had built that house two years out of the Army, where we both were shaved-headed, and so far as we knew, both equally poor, but he wasn't poor.
And he's a multi-multi-millionaire, and he's taken a whole bunch of money and made a whole bunch more out of it.
And so he had a place up in the foothills, and it was beautiful.
We got snowed in.
We were up there two or three days longer than we had planned to be.
And on the way out of there, driving back to Wichita Falls, Sunday afternoon, as I recall, it was a Sunday, and listening to the radio, Mr. Kennedy was interrupted, whatever we were listening to, and said, ask not.
what you can do for your country, or your country can do for you, ask what you can do for your country, and called us to active duty for the Berlin crisis.
And I was to report the next morning at 7.30 to the armory in Wichita Falls for active duty.
I didn't even have time to tell my boss, I'm gone.
I've been conscripted or something.
And about a week later, after we loaded up all our trucks and got all our gear, we were headed off to Fort Polk, Louisiana and opened a post that had been closed since 1945 and prepared pretty hard to go to Berlin.
But we never did have to go.
So I was fortunate to serve in the Army two times, active duty, and both times were in between wars.
I didn't have to go any place.
What do you mean you got out when?
In 62.
And then when?
One year, almost to the day.
At that time I thought, well, since I'm misplaced, I'm out of a job, I'm over here in the swamps of Louisiana, I think I'll go back to school.
And the reason I thought I needed to go back to school, because I had my professional degree, I was licensed to practice architecture by the state.
And I thought I need to go back to school because I had realized that there was a course I really, really needed to take that I didn't take, and it was an accounting course.
I needed an accounting course.
And while I was at it, I had talked to my department head, who at that time was Nicky Holloman, that was after
Mr. Langford had stepped aside.
I talked my department head into letting me skip an architecture history class
And that was the same year that the Texas state government made political science or history one a requirement.
Both of them.
Both of them, OK.
Well, they gave us some leeway because they were adding hours to our curriculum.
So they gave us a little leeway with dropping a few things.
And so I picked the things I liked the least and dropped those.
And one of them was an architectural history course and then a few electives.
That's where the accounting would have probably come in.
And it didn't take me very long to be out in the real world to understand that I really needed all of those courses.
So I came back to get them.
Came back here?
Came back to NM just because I was married and had two children at the time.
And that's the fall of?
62.
And came back as a graduate student.
How had the place changed?
How had architecture here changed in your absence?
It seemed to me to be more polished.
to be a little more sophisticated, to have a more diverse faculty.
Located where, physically?
Located still in the academic building.
Fourth floor?
Fourth floor, which was our home until 1964.
Was it larger in students and faculty numbers?
I think so, but I probably couldn't give you a reasonable estimate of what the number was, because we were still all on the fourth floor.
Who was the administrative head of architecture then?
Nicky Holloman.
Yeah.
So I didn't talk Nicky into it when I left.
I talked Mr. Langford into it in 57 when I left, out of the two courses that I really wanted to come back to school to take.
And while I was back here at school, I ended up with a master's degree, which was in retrospect the smartest thing I ever did.
And that was completely by accident.
Had the Army not pulled me out of Wichita Falls, I'd probably still be sitting up there.
doing piddly little work.
But I did finish that, and that was good.
And that was the highest degree in this field at the time.
And how long did that take?
About two years, because I taught the whole time.
When I came back to school, Mr. Romanek
was the head of the program at that time, not just the fifth-year prof. He was the head of the program, so at that time he was called the chairman of the division, I believe it was.
We quickly moved into a school status, and then he was, you know, he was, I think he was still chairman of the school.
In 1969, we became an independent college for engineering, and he, Romnick, was the first dean.
But Rominick told me when I came back, I was the only graduate student here.
We had a master's degree, but I was the only graduate student in architecture.
And so Mr. Rominick gave me three courses to teach.
And by that, I mean there was no faculty member
ever in sight.
There's no faculty member's name on the roll, nothing.
My name was on all of them.
I taught three courses, three sections of 50 students, and I was buried under papers and trying to go to school.
And I said, I told him at one time, I said, Mr. Romick, are you sure this is what graduate students do?
I'm just buried with work.
And he said, yeah, that's what they do.
I'm sorry, just have to belly up and do it.
How many courses were you taking at that time, probably?
Oh, at least three.
So you were teaching three and taking three.
Yeah.
At least.
For two years.
Yeah, a couple of years.
Now, at that time, what did you think your career goal was at that point?
To go into business for myself.
I didn't expect to be back here then.
And one of the greatest problems I've had since I came back here in 71
was when I left here in 64, 65, somewhere around 65 I think it was, when I left here in 65 I threw all my old pay stubs away because I didn't think I'd ever come down this trail again so I was cleaning out to move and I threw all my pay stubs away.
When I get back here in 71, which is another absolute fluky scenario,
And I said, oh, by the way, I've worked here before.
I worked here during this other period.
And they never could find all of that stuff.
And I didn't have any evidence of it.
And I've been fighting that for 30 years, trying to get credit.
I finally got credit.
They said, OK, you've been here that long.
But they won't give me vacation credit for it.
I taught 12 months a year.
I taught in the summer and both semesters.
Alan Stacel and Graham Horsley and I taught all the freshmen.
Every course, fall, spring, and summer, for those three years that I was here, side by side.
You were here three years finishing your masters?
Was that when you mean the three years?
Yes.
I finished my master in 64, so I said 62, 63, 64.
Three years, yeah.
Then you left and went where?
I worked here in town for a year with D.D.
Matthews, architects, because I was working for him part-time during my last year of school, and so I just stayed on and worked with him for another year, and then I went into business with an old classmate of mine over in Nacogdoches, Texas.
He had been trying to talk me to come over there and join him for some time, and I finally did in 66 go there.
and got five years of experience being in business for myself, which was a different kind of experience.
What did you learn from that, that would be important to you as a teacher?
The same thing that former students call back and tell me on a regular basis, I hope to heaven you're teaching those kids something about business.
And I had realized that before, that's why I came back to take that accounting course.
I knew I needed some more business kind of background.
And when I was in business myself, I knew I needed a lot more about business, finance, contracts, law.
the business of running large complex projects, just lots of the whole management area, operations and management.
So then you come back to stay in 1971.
Yes.
How did that come about?
Well, it came about because a couple of decent jobs came up in Nacogdoches that my partner and I should have gotten.
One of which was a bank.
It was our bank.
It's where we banked and borrowed money and paid money back and things like that.
We knew all the people on a first-name basis in the bank and the bank was getting ready to hire an architect and build a new bank.
And we didn't even get asked to interview for the job.
And another one was an automobile dealership and the owner of the automobile dealership, we ran around with his son
played golf and did things like that.
And he was on the board of trustees for the large church that we had done in Nacogdoches.
And so we knew him very well, too.
And we had just seen the neatest automobile dealership we'd ever seen in San Antonio one day, for some reason, built in among the trees.
Nacogdoches had a propensity, when they wanted to build something, is just bulldozing down everything and building something nice and flat.
And my partner and I, Carl Maynard, had had the idea all along that, why are we cutting down all these beautiful trees?
Just to build things, we ought to be able to do better than that.
Anyway, we wanted that Ford dealership because we wanted to do a really nice Ford dealership.
We thought one could be done, something just beside the parking lot.
And again, we didn't get interviewed.
So in what in business we called a post-denial evaluation, we went back and said, why?
Why, Tipton?
You knew we're here.
We're here all the time.
We bought our cars from you.
We know you.
We know your kid.
And you've gone off and hired somebody and getting ready to build this Ford dealership and said, well, in the Ford business, all the wheel that squeaks the loudest.
And I never did hear from you boys, so I didn't think you were interested.
And so I just said, I'm out of here.
I'm gone.
And I was, in fact, in Dallas interviewing and had some very good opportunities being presented to me in Dallas, some very good opportunities, when Romanek called me.
Romanek is weaved in and out of my life since I was 18 years old, since I was 20 years old.
Ramanick called me and said get down here I need to talk to you and so I came down here and when I was here he said I want you to come and be the director of our new research center, the architecture research center and put that program together for me.
It needs a little management help and we need a little more direction out there and whatever and I want you to come and run that program for me and I'll pay you fifteen thousand dollars a year.
which in those particular days was a decent salary.
Not great, but decent, very decent.
And when I got here, I found out
that once again that turkey had screwed me around because I was being paid the same thing Randy Walagura and Russell Stogstall were being paid who were under me.
I was getting ready to be their boss and they were, I taught them when I was a graduate student here, five years or whatever it was before then, they were in one of my classes.
Fortunately I didn't stay at that level very long either.
because shortly thereafter, like in 73 maybe, the person that had been the academic assistant dean, in those days we actually had associate deans and assistant deans, and the associate dean typically was involved with research and coordination and being executive dean, and the assistant dean was the academic
affairs dean, particularly undergraduate, and we were basically an undergraduate program.
So anyway, the guy that was the assistant dean for academic affairs left, who I had taught as a graduate student too, when I was a graduate student, he left, and so Romanek asked me to come across the bridge and take that job, which, and I did.
And I was still in that job when our next dean, Raymond Darrell Reed, came along.
But wait, let's stay with this.
When you got back, this is 71, when you got back, the architecture program was located in the building where it is now.
Is that right?
No, we were in what we call building C now, the building we occupied in 64.
We were in that building.
The dean was in that building.
All the departments were in that building.
There were five departments.
And we had the old hospital that is now torn down, but we had the entire old hospital.
We had two or three of the barracks, three I believe.
And we used some rooms in some other buildings.
So we were scattered all over the campus.
At that time, the program was a five-year baccalaureate degree in architecture?
It started switching when we became a college in 1969.
It started switching.
Romanek was switching it from a five-year program to a four-two or undergraduate and graduate.
component, and the last graduates with a five-year degree left in 72, just when I got here, shortly after I got here.
Do you have any perception as to the faculty and student numbers when you got back in 71?
My recollection is there were about 800, but that's in all the five departments, four programs.
Architecture being an undergraduate and a graduate department.
What were those other programs?
Landscape, one.
Construction science, two.
Planning, three.
And architecture, four and five.
Because the undergraduate architecture component was a separate department at that time.
Who were the key faculty members in those programs in the early 70s?
Well, the department heads, and that would be Jim Marsh in construction science.
Who else was in construction?
Who were the other faculty members that best known?
You're going to surprise me, Haskell.
Willard Cootie, Carol Kleykamp,
Okay, we can slide on to that.
Bill Kellett, Albert Padula, Jerry Trost, they were all in construction science and landscape headed by Robert F. White.
Michael Murphy, who I taught when I was a graduate student, was in there.
Shortly after I got here, Bob White retired and Don Austin came to be the department head and has been a major player in that department ever since.
It's a very small program so there's not going to be too many faculty in there.
And planning, Chewy Hinojosa, Jesus Hinojosa.
Was he the department head?
He wasn't the first, the first department head was Joe McGraw and Joe, I don't remember when Joe quit being department head but Jesus Hinojosa came on about that time and was department head for several years and it was a pretty small program too and a graduate only program it didn't have an undergraduate component at all.
Then in architecture.
And then architecture and the the head of architecture at that particular moment
When I came back here was Alan Stasel.
Yes, Stasel was the head of the program whenever we became a college.
He was part of the team that put together the proposal that we become a separate college.
So Stasel in the undergraduate, the environmental design program, and David
No, no, no.
Wes Harper was head of the architecture program at that moment in time.
How had the curriculum... And Romanek was a faculty member.
Since you first arrived as a student, until the time you arrived the last time as a faculty member, how had the curriculum in architecture changed?
Well, it changed a pretty good bit because the concept was changing.
What the architects of our curriculum were doing at that time were trying to change this way.
Let's see if we can't have a two-year program for anyone that wanted to be in any of our programmatic areas.
We'll have two years that are common, and we'll all take basic design, we'll all take history, we'll all take math, we'll all do things like that.
And then at the end of the second year a person would make a choice to go to one of these other programs be it landscape or construction and ironically planning wasn't playing at that time.
They were planning grew out of us offering one course in planning when I was a student here.
We had one elective in planning and and it was taught by Joe McGraw.
Joe McGraw later become a department head and it was built off of this one course.
landscape had been here for a little while.
It came from horticulture.
That's where Robert White was when he had his first small classes over in that area.
And construction science just grew out of our optional program from quite a ways back.
So it's sort of been with the architecture program for a long, long time.
Anyway, we
The idea was that you would go into construction science, or into landscape, or into architecture, and then follow it up.
And in architecture, it would go another two years to finish your professional degree.
And in the other two, they would remain baccalaureate programs.
But the phenomenon that we witnessed during those early years was that the other two programmatic areas, well, in fact, all three of the other programmatic areas outside of architecture, were actually growing up and taking on an identity of their own.
and the more they got the more sophisticated they got the more and better faculty they got the more and better students they got and and that was all driven by a pretty good job market for at least the construction science guys they didn't want to they didn't want to waste their first two years taking kiddie architecture courses so there was there was sort of a natural phenomenon beginning to happen with people
trying to get rid of or water down the original model that the college was started on, based on.
And in fact today, the only program that is anywhere close to that model is the architecture program by itself.
And so it's really not a model anymore, it's just kind of a regular architecture curriculum, but instead of being a five-year baccalaureate,
The minute it went to, and I know this is the kind of thing that legislators and others fear, but the minute it went from a five-year baccalaureate program to a six-year graduate degree program, which was not substantially different than the five-year program,
But it took on a different kind of life.
Just being in the graduate college and following the graduate college rules and having different places to submit degree plans and that sort of thing began to change the whole environment of the last two years in architecture.
And it's sort of like the analogy I was making with Romnick's grading.
The program began to think of itself in better terms, just because it was in better terms.
So you are saying that the six-year program, the four plus two, you think was far better, that that was a good step instead of a five-year program.
Yes.
Yes, absolutely.
Without question.
In fact, now then, 69 to 99, 30 years later,
We have a national referendum going on in our business where all of the Associated Collegiate Schools of Architecture and the accrediting board and all of the groups together have just made their first pass.
They have another one to go, but they've just made their first pass at requiring
No, they're going to refuse to accredit five-year programs.
Really?
Starting in about five years.
No, ten years.
They're going to give everybody ten years to switch.
Get out of it.
We're not accrediting any new ones, and that's just the first volley across your bow.
We're going to get rid of them.
Were we a pioneer in that?
Yes.
Any other notable examples that were?
Well, the report that pushed all of that off, I was in Nacogdoches at the time, but the report that pushed all of that off
was the Princeton Report.
Was it on education generally or just architecture?
I think generally.
I think it was too.
But something in there pushed Romnick and Staisal and Cecil Stewart was our associate dean at the time.
who just retired 20 years being dean up at Nebraska, pushed those guys off of center and said, we can do better than this.
And they just did it.
And we were like one of two schools in 1969 that had gone to that model.
Today, it's a little over 50% of the schools in the country.
And most of the architects out there that have a five-year degree, I have one, but I don't count myself in that camp.
But most of the architects that do think that's the degree God intended architects to have.
You're talking religion now if you're going to mess with my degree.
Texas Tech, who's always had the reputation in this state of being the more vocational, the more technical kind of architecture school at least.
Texas Tech a few years ago, no more than five years ago, just convinced their board and coordinating board and changed from a five-year baccalaureate degree to a five-year master's degree just like that.
And there's no baccalaureate degree in the program.
and they began getting graduate credit at the end of three and a half years.
Unbelievable.
Well, it had to do also with Chancellor Monford, which I'm sure had something to do with that, getting such good approval on the Coordinating Board and so on.
But the worm is turning, but it's been a long, slow turn, but it's turning faster.
Who deserves most of the credit for that decision here?
Romanek.
Romanek?
Yes.
Now, there's a practical matter.
He had some awfully good advisors around him, Stacel and Cecil and things like that, but the inspirational and the spiritual leader of the group is Romanek.
In the early 70s, how did you and your colleagues feel about the campus leadership at that time, John Calhoun and Jack Williams and so forth?
I can't honestly say that we thought a lot about it at all.
Well, did you feel that architecture was being supported, that architecture was moving along?
Oh, we've always had the idea that architecture is not supported as well as the other fields, and a lot of that's of our own making.
Of course, we know that.
But there was no research in architecture and no PhD being offered in architecture.
And those two things, of course, go together.
So we were looked at and I think generally felt like we were never getting what we thought ought to be our full shake from the administration.
But we were part of the problem, too.
John Calhoun came, the first time I recall when I was in a leadership kind of role, John Calhoun came over and talked to us.
And he said, somebody asked him, what was he called?
Vice President for Academic Affairs.
What does the Vice President for Academic Affairs do exactly?
Somebody asked him, he said, well,
Everything that has to do with academic affairs falls under the auspices of the vice president for academic affairs.
Now that means curriculum and students and of course we have to house the students so that means dormitories and we have to get students from the dorms to class.
That means sidewalks and parking places.
And I thought when I listened to him, well what are all those other vice presidents to do?
I don't know but John Calhoun seemed to think
I think that's how we got the word provost, came right after a feeling like that.
And I know that you were on that team at that particular moment in history.
And Dick Way nerdy.
And Dr. Ramanick, Professor Ramanick, Dean Ramanick, retired as dean?
during that, during the early 70s?
Yes, I think Raymond Darrell Reed came in 75.
Why did he, was it age?
No, no, he was fired.
If he wasn't fired, he was told in words of one syllable, we're going to replace you.
No, he was replaced.
Do you have any idea as to why?
Yes, the 402 curriculum.
Oh, okay.
This is a religious matter.
Besides, Ramanick was never a public relations person at all.
If you knew him, you loved him, but it was sometimes hard to get past his little first barrier, and he took great pride in that, so that he didn't make friends really easy.
And there were some serious former students who were complaining to the administration about this fellow Romanek and what he was doing.
How did those of you on the faculty feel about his departure?
My best recollection is we thought it was probably normal.
We thought he was being pushed out.
But a couple of other things had happened.
It wasn't just a few former students that were unhappy about us not being in a five-year mode.
We did a research report right after I had left the research center.
A research report out there got published, and it had been funded by the state of Texas.
And it was done.
The principal investigator was Jerry Trost.